# PSnpBind-ML: A machine learning approach to predict the binding pocket SNP's effects on protein-ligand binding affinity

A key concept in drug design is how natural variants, especially the ones occurring in the binding site of drug targets, affect the inter-individual drug response and efficacy by altering binding affinity. These effects have been studied on very limited and small datasets while, ideally, a large dataset of binding affinity changes due to binding site single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) is needed.In this work we used the PSnpBind database to train a machine learning model predicting protein-ligand binding affinity and binding pocket SNPs effect on it. Vector representation of protein, pocket, mutation, and ligand information was encoded using a total of 256 engineered features. Two designs of machine learning regression models were trained/evaluated on the designed features to predict the reference binding affinity using six different split scenarios. The best performance model reported an RMSE value of 0.57 kcal/mol-1 on an independent test set with an R-squared value of 0.86 and a prediction speed of 0.35 ms per instance. We report an improvement in the prediction performance of the ML models, compared to several reported models developed for protein-ligand binding affinity prediction. The obtained models are feasible for use as a complementary method in early-stage drug discovery. They can be applied to rapidly obtain a better overview of the ligand binding affinity changes across protein variants carried by people in the population and selecting potential leads that achieve a better affinity overall protein variants.
